Project title:
Protein synthesis modeling with extended TASEP: a computational approach 
to understand selective translation of transcripts with codon usage biases 
through tRNA reprogramming by cells under stressed conditions. 
Proof of concept in melanomas and osteoarthritis.

Research interests:
•	Computational biology, mechanistic and stochastic modeling
•	Statistical physics (stochastic) model of protein translation by totally asymmetric simple exclusion process (TASEP)
•	Bioinformatics
•	Biostatistics, data mining and machine learning
•	Molecular biology, biological chemistry, signaling cascades, omics (transcriptome, translatome and proteome)

Project summary:
Translation of mRNA into protein represents the final stage in gene expression 
by which the transcribed mRNA is read by the ribosomal machinery, that translocates 
along the open reading frame to interpret the encoded peptide sequence. The case has 
been made that a high level of transcripts is not necessarily reflected in a high level 
of proteins: the poor correlation between the transcriptome and the proteome can be 
attributed to post-transcriptional regulatory layers involving tRNA modifications, of 
which the so-called wobble base U34 tRNA reprogramming is of interest in the context 
of stressed cells or in tumors. The modified or unmodified wobble base tRNA anticodon 
pairing to codon both affects the translation elongation rate of a specific transcript 
or selectively promote the expression levels of subsets of transcripts having specific 
patterns in codon usage. The change in protein synthesis rate can lead to protein 
misfolding and aggregation problems. In our research, we investigate the codon usage 
pattern as a potential useful source of data mining in bioinformatics to infer phenotypes 
from genomic sequences.  The general biology of the tRNA reprogramming is currently 
poorly understood. Our project aims at extending a stochastic model of protein 
translation called TASEP (totally asymmetric simple exclusion process) taking into 
account tRNA reprogramming. The purpose is to help better understand  experimental 
results collected jointly such as RNA-Seq, Ribo-Seq, ribosome occupancy and proteome 
levels in cancer research and in osteoarthritis research where cells are subjected to 
targeted therapy or are chemically or mechanically stressed. 

Educational records
•	Bio-engineer (AgroBio-tech) – campus Gembloux University of Liege
•	Master in Physics – University of Liege
•	Master in Statistics (specialization in bioinformatics) – Hasselt University
Publications
https://orbi.uliege.be/ph-search?uid=U179427
Contacts
marc.joiret@uliege.be
links
personal website:  http://www.marcjoiret.be
